# Choosing Strings

## Preamble
This note is part of a series of notes that gives complete end-to-end examples
of using Interface Types to export and import functions.

## Introduction

Keeping track of memory that is allocated in order to allow string processing
can be challenging. This example illustrates an extreme case that involves the
non-deterministic computation of string values.

This scenario is a model of many situations where the actual flow of data
between a call and callee can be very difficult to predict. A consequence of
that is that one cannot easily predict when given allocated blocks may be freed.

Our exemplar for this is the non-deterministic C++ chooser function; which
(might) return one of its `string` arguments as its return value:

```C++
typedef std::shared_ptr<std::string> shared_string;

shared_string nondeterministic_choice(shared_string one, shared_string two) {
  return random() > 0.5 ? std::move(one) : std::move(two);
}
```

This function takes two string arguments and returns one of them -- at
random. It uses C++ `shared_ptr` structures to try to avoid any unnecessary
copying; whilst also potentially allowing the callee to keep hold of its input
arguments.

Regardless of the merits of this particular function, it sets up significant
challenges should we want to expose it using Interface Types. Specifically,
there are two resources entering the function, with just one leaving. However,
when exposed as an Interface Type function, all these resources must be created
and properly disposed of within the adapter code itself.

## Exporting the Chooser

The Interface Type function signature for our chooser is simple: the function
takes two `string`s and returns one:

```wasm
(@interface func (export "chooser")
  (param $left string)
  (param $right string)
  (result string)
)
```

One of the specific challenges in this scenario is the handling of shared
pointers. We 'require' that the core `nondeterministic_choice` function honor
the semantics of proper reference counting the input arguments and the returned
string.

However, there are actually _two_ schemes in play in this scenario: the
Interface Types management of resources and the C++ implementation of
`shared_ptr`. Effectively, in addition to lifting and lowering the `string`
values we must also lift and lower the ownership between Interface Types and
core WASM.

In this scenario we take a somewhat simplified view of C++'s implementation of
shared pointers: a shared pointer is implemented as a pair consisting of a
reference count and a raw pointer to the shared resource.

>Note: In practice, the C++ implementation of shared pointers is somewhat more
>complex; for reasons that are not important here.

This results in _two_ memory allocations for the shared resource: one for the
resource itself and one for the pointer structure -- which contains a reference
count and a raw pointer to the resource.


```wasm
(@interface func $stralloc-x
  (param $str string)
  (result (owned i32))        ;; return an owned shared ptr of the string
  local.get $str
  string.size
  call-export "malloc-x"     ;; create string entity of right size
  own (i32)
    call-export "free-x"     ;; temporary, until safely re-owned
  end
  let (local $ptr (owned i32)) (result (owned i32))
    (utf8.from.string
      (local.get $str)
      (owned.access (local.get $ptr))  ;; access the owned pointer
      (string.size
        (local.get $str)))
    local.get $ptr
  end
)

(@interface func $sharedalloc-x
  (param $ptr (owned i32))
  (result (owned i32))        ;; return a shared ptr of the entity

  local.get $ptr
  owned.release              ;; access pointer and remove ownership
  call-export "shared-builder-x" ;; make it a shared ptr pair
  own (i32)                  ;; re-own it, with a different destructor
    call-export "shared-release-x"
  end
end
)

(@interface func (export "chooser")
  (param $left string)
  (param $right string)
  (result string)

  (call-export "nondeterministic_choice"  ;; call the chooser itself
    (invoke-func $sharedalloc-x     ;; make it a shared ptr
      (invoke-func $stralloc-x
        (local.get $left)))
    (invoke-func $sharedalloc-x   ;; make it a shared ptr
      (invoke-func $stralloc-x
        (local.get $right))))
  own (i32)               ;; own the result
    call-export "shared-release-x"    ;; will eventually call to free string
  end
  owned.access
  (string.from.utf8
    (call-export "access-utf8-x"
      (call-export "shared-get-ptr-x")))
)
```

For clarity, we separate out two helper functions -- `sharedalloc-x` and
`stralloc-x` -- whose role respectively is to create a shared pointer pair and
to instantiate a memory string from an Interface Types's `string` entity.

>Note the `-x` suffix signals that these functions are part of the exporting
>module.

>Note, like the import and export adapters themselves, they will be inlined as
>part of the adapter fusion process.

The returned value from `nondeterministic_choice` is wrapped up as an `own`ed
allocation and lifted to a `string`.

>Note we do not need to `own` the string memory of the arguments because we have
>wrapped them into `shared_ptr` structures that the callee will manage. 

In addition to the Interface Types memory management, because we are using a
non-trivial C++ structure, we have to invoke the appropriate constructors,
access functions and destructors of our `shared_ptr` structure.

This is achieved through some additional core helper functions that are exported
by the core wasm module, although they would not typically be exported as
Interface Type functions:

* `shared-builder-x` : `(T)=>shared_ptr<T>` is used to create and initialize a
  `shared_ptr` structure. It takes a pointer as an argument and returns a
  `shared_ptr` with an initial reference count of 1.

* `shared-release-x` : `(shared_ptr<T>)=>void` is used to decrement the
  reference count of a `shared_ptr`; and if that results in the reference count
  dropping to zero _both the underlying resource and the `shared_ptr` structure
  itself are disposed of_.

* `shared-get-ptr-x` : `(shared_ptr<T>)=>T` is used to access the underlying
  resource of a `shared_ptr` without affecting it's reference count.

* `access-utf8-x` : `(std_string)=>(char*,i32)` is used to access the memory
  pointer for a string's text and its length.

In practice there would likely be additional support functions -- such as a
version of accessing a shared resource whilst incrementing reference
count. However, we do not need them in this scenario.

>Note: We do not give the code for these helper functions. We expect that, in
>practice, compiler tool chains will construct a range of common helper
>functions that act to reduce the length of individual adapter.

## Calling the chooser

We shall assume that the import to `nondeterministic_choice` were as though it
was from a core WebAssembly import whose signature is:

```wasm
(func (import "" "chooser_")
  (param i32 i32)
  (result i32))
```

The two strings are passed as memory addresses of structures -- from which the
text of the string and its length can be ascertained. The structure itself is
unspecified; we will use access functions -- such as `access-utf8` as needed.

>Note that although it may seem clear to _the reader_ that the returned value
>must one of the arguments to the call, the limitations of Interface Types mean
>that the returned string will be a copy of one of the arguments.

The import adapter for `chooser_` has to lift the two argument `string`s and
lower the return value:

```wasm
(@interface func $stralloc-i
  (param $str string)
  (result (owned i32))        ;; return an owned shared ptr of the string
  local.get $str
  string.size
  call-export "malloc-i"     ;; create string entity of right size
  own (i32)
    call-export "free-i"     ;; temporary, until safely re-owned
  end
  let (local $ptr (owned i32)) (result (owned i32))
    (utf8.from.string
      (local.get $str)
      (owned.access (local.get $ptr))  ;; access the owned pointer
      (string.size
        (local.get $str)))
    local.get $ptr
  end
)

(@interface implement (import "" "chooser_")
  (param $l i32)
  (param $r i32)
  (result i32)

  local.get $l
  call-export "access-utf8-i" ;; get at the text & length of the left string
  string.from.utf8

  local.get $r
  call-export "access-utf8-i" ;; the right string
  string.from.utf8

  call-import "chooser"  ;; leaves a string on stack

  invoke-func "stralloc-i" ;; allocate a local string for the result
  owned.release            ;; remove ownership signal at end
)
```

Compared to the export adapter, the import adapter is very straightforward. This
is because we require the caller -- a core wasm function -- to take
responsibility for the argument strings and for the returned string.

>Note that the `stralloc-i` is functionally identical to its counterpart
>`stralloc-x` -- except that it operates within the import module on the
>latter's memory.

## Fusing adapters

The fused adapter consists of the inlined export adapter within the import
adapter; which is then simplified. In this case we have a simple import adapter
being combined with one that has some complexity:

```wasm
(@interface implement (import "" "chooser_")
  (param $l i32)
  (param $r i32)
  (result i32)

  local.get $l
  call-export "access-utf8-i"
  string.from.utf8

  local.get $r
  call-export "access-utf8-i"
  string.from.utf8

  let (local $left string)(local $right string)(result string)
    (call-export "nondeterministic_choice"  ;; call the chooser itself
      (invoke-func $sharedalloc-x     ;; make it a shared ptr
        (invoke-func $stralloc-x
          (local.get $left)))
      (invoke-func $sharedalloc-x   ;; make it a shared ptr
        (invoke-func $stralloc-x
          (local.get $right))))
    own (i32)               ;; own the result
      call-export "shared-release-x"    ;; will eventually call to free string
    end
    owned.access
    (string.from.utf8
      (call-export "access-utf8-x"
        (call-export "shared-get-ptr-x")))
  end
  invoke-func "stralloc-i" ;; allocate a local string for the result
  owned.release            ;; remove ownership signal at end
)
```

After we expand the helper functions, performing the inlining, fusing pairs of
lifting and lowering operations, memory ownership resolutions, and other
rewriting operations, we get code that no longer has any explicit Interface Type
instructions:


```wasm
(@interface implement (import "" "chooser_")
  (param $l i32)
  (param $r i32)
  (result i32)
  (local $o1 i32) ;; left string shared-ptr memory
  (local $o2 i32) ;; right string shared-ptr memory
  (local $o3 i32)

  local.get $l
  call-export "access-utf8-i" ;; return base & len
  
  let (local $lbase i32)(local $lsize i32)(result i32)
    local.get $lbase
    local.get $lsize
    call-export "malloc-x"
    let (local $ptr i32)(result i32)
      local.get $lbase
      local.get $ptr
      local.get $lsize
      memory.copy "mem-i" "mem-x" ;; copy string across
      local.get $ptr
      call-export "shared-builder-x" ;; make it a shared ptr pair
      local.tee $o1
    end
    let (local $lp i32) (result i32)
      local.get $r
      call-export "access-utf8-i"
      let (local $rbase i32)(local $rsize i32)(result i32)
        local.get $rbase
        local.get $rsize
        call-export "malloc-x"
        let (local $ptr i32)(result i32)
          local.get $rbase
          local.get $rsize
          local.get $ptr
          local.get $rsize
          memory.copy "mem-i" "mem-x" ;; copy string across
          local.get $ptr
          call-export "shared-builder-x" ;; make it a shared ptr pair
          local.tee $o2
        end
        let (local $rp i32)(result i32)
          local.get $lp
          local.get $rp
          call-export "nondeterministic_choice"  ;; call the chooser itself
          local.tee $o3
          call-export "shared-get-ptr-x"
          call-export "access-utf8-x"
          let (local $xbase i32) (local $xsize i32) (result i32)
            local.get $xsize
            call-export "malloc-i"     ;; create string entity of right size
            let (local $ptr i32)(result i32)
              local.get $xbase
              local.get $ptr
              local.get $xsize
              memory.copy "mem-x" "mem-i"
              local.get $ptr           ;; our final return value
            end
          end
        end
      end
    end
  end
  local.get $o1
  call-export "shared-release-x"
  local.get $o2
  call-export "shared-release-x"
  local.get $o3
  call-export "shared-release-x" 
)
```

One of the final steps in this fusing process is unwrapping the `own`ed blocks
and moving their contents to the correct place in the final adapter. This
requires us to know where in the code the last reference to the owned value are.

This is achieved in two phases: creating local variables that reference the
stack values captured by the `own` instructions, and then moving the `own`ed
block of instructions to the appropriate location.

Note that the various `owned.access` instructions disappear at this point.

In this case, the `$lp` and `$rp` values have no mention after the call to
`"nondterministic_choice"`, and so we can move the `"shared-release"` calls to
just after that call. Similarly, the release of the return value can be
performed after returned string has been copied into the importing module.

For simplicity, we migrated all the deallocations to the end of the fused
adapter. In some situations, for example when processing arrays, we may wish to
be more aggressive in invoking the memory release code.

Although fairly long, this fused adapter has a straightforward structure: the
input strings are copied from the import memory to the export memory -- and also
wrapped as shared pointer structures as required by the signature of the
`nondeterministic_chooser` function. The resulting string is copied from the
export localtion to the import memory. And, finally, any temporary structures
allocated are released.

Note that the string returned by `nondeterministic_chooser` is not directly
freed -- using a call to `"free-x"` (say). Instead, we invoke the
`shared-release-x` function which decrements the reference count; and if zero
then the memory is freed.  This is because the return is also a shared pointer
and it is possible that `nondeterministic_chooser` took an additional reference
to the structure.

We also decrement the reference count of the created argument strings -- just in
case the callee keeps an additional reference to either one.


